#cs
Computer programming is the process of performing particular [[Computation|Computations]], usually by designing and building executable computer programs. Programming involves tasks such as analysis, generating [[Algorithm|Algorithms]] and resource consumptions. The source code of a program is written in one or more languages that are intelligible to programmers, rather than machine code, which is directly executable by the central processing unit. The purpose of programming is to find a sequence of [[Instructions]] that will automate the performance of a task on a computer, often for solving a given problem.

Tasks accompanying and relating to programming include testing, debugging, source code maintenance, implementation of systems and management of derived artefacts, such as the machine code of computer programs. However, often the term software development is more likely used for this larger overall process - whereas the terms programming, implementation and coding tend to be focused on the actual writing of code.

## Machine Language
Machine code was the language of early programs, written in the instruction set of the particular machine, often in [[Binary]] notation. [[Assembly Programming|Assembly]] languages were soon developed that let the programmer specify instruction in a text format (e.g. ADD X, TOTAL), with abbreviations for each operation code and meaningful names for specifying addresses. However, because an assembly language is little more than a different notation for a machine language, two machines with different instruction sets also have different assembly languages.

## Compiler Languages
High-level languages made the process of developing a program simpler and more understandable, and less bound to the underlying [[Hardware]]. The first compiler related tool, the A-0 System, was developed in 1952 by Grace Hopper, who also coined the term 'compiler'.